Also the **genital system**, controls reproduction.
Male genitalia is outside the pelvis except for the **prostate gland** and the **seminal vesicles**. Female genitalia is within the pelvis except for the **clitoris** and **labia**.

The male reproductive system consists of scrotum, testicles, vasa deferentia, ejaculatory ducts, urethra, penis, and epididymis. Each testicle produces hormones and sperm, which go to the epididymis to develop. They then go to the urethra through the **vasa deferentia** during ejaculation. Infection or damage to the penis can spread to the [[Urinary System]].

The female reproductive system include the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries are typically in RLQ and LLQ. Produce hormones to regulate reproductive function and sexual characteristics. Produce the **oocytes** that become mature eggs during oogenesis, creating an ovum. During reproductive years, pituitary gland releases **follicle-stimulating hormone** and **luteinizing hormone** around every month to stimulate ovum release in **ovulation**.  The fallopian tubes carry the ovum to the uterus, lined by the **endometrium**. The base later connects directly to the **myometrium** (muscle wall of the uterus). Opening from the uterus to vagina is the **cervix**. Area between urethral opening and anus is the **perineum**, containing the external genitalia.

External genitalia is the **vulva**. **Labia minora** is skin folds that border the vestibule, which contains vaginal and urethral opening, plus the **clitoris**. Labia minora meet over clitoris, forming the **prepuce**. **Labia majora** are outside it and meet at the **mons pubis**. During the **menstrual cycle**, an ovum matures and ruptures the ovary's surface, if not fertilized, the **corpus luteum**(ovum remnants) shed with the uterine lining. This begins with **menarche** and ends with **menopause**, with the lining thickening and then shedding in **menstruation**. Average cycle is 28 days with day one being the first day of flow. Various hormones like GnRH, FSH, LH, estrogen, and progesterone stimulate uterine lining at different stages.

**Mammary glands** are modified sweat glands that produce milk, **areolar glands** make secretions to protect the nipple and areola in nursing.